---
layout: post
title: Use of Weapons
categories: books
short: 
---

*Use of Weapons*, by Iain M. Banks, is the third novel in the Culture series,
after *Consider Phlebas* and *The Player of Games*. Having enjoyed the first two
I started *Use of Weapons* expecting more enjoyable reading. I was a bit
nonplussed but the narrative structure at first, but after turning the last page
I can say I really liked it.

# Narrative

The narrative structure of the book is really weird. We are told two stories,
that when put together form one larger story. The larger story is the biography
of book's protagonist, who goes by the name Cheradenine Zakalwe.

That is not the weird thing, though. The weird thing is that these two stories
are interwoven in alternating chapters, and move in opposite temporal
directions. The first chapter is labelled "One" and is part of the main
narrative of the book; its events take place in "the present" (which means
sometime not after 2093 AD). The second chapter is labelled "XIII" and is part
of the secondary narrative; it describes events that took place some time before
chapter "One". After "XIII" comes chapter "Two" which describes events following
the ones in "One". And then comes "XII" with events that take place before
"XIII". This alternating pattern continues throughout the entire book. To
further complicate matters, some of the backward moving chapters involve
characters having flashbacks of even older events.

The main narrative tells us how Diziet got the protagonist back from exile in
order to do one last job, how he performed that job, and how he got paid for it.
The secondary narrative tells us important events of Zakalwe's earlier life,
including some of the previous jobs he did for the Culture.

One nice thing about this structure is that you get two powerful endings for the
price of one. The "larger story" of the book starts with a pivotal event in the
protagonist's life, but we wonder about it until the very end of the secondary
narrative.

At first I found the whole deal was confusing, but over time I grew to like it.
It gradually piqued my interest in the protagonist's goals and motivations, and
that makes the story much more interesting, and the endings much more rewarding.

